blog/2072.md, before:

+++
title = "The servers are on the literal moon (2072)"
published = "2022-05-23"
tags = ["fiction"]
rss = "You were right about mind uploading being a big deal, though that was obvious in 2022, right?"
+++

# The servers are on the literal moon (2072)
Hi, past Finn. I thought it was a bit weird of you to write a letter to yourself in 50 years’ time, given all your stated beliefs on emerging technologies involving either the end of civilisation or the digitisation of human life. Still, I’m glad you did! 

You were right about mind uploading being a big deal, though that was obvious in 2022, right? A lot has changed but, as far as I can tell, I’m still made of atoms rather than bits — inhabiting “meatspace” as you put it… (I haven’t heard that term in a long time)

As for the AI stuff, it’s good at art and science — and it basically powers everything — but it doesn’t *decide* anything, really. (I don’t know how to succinctly explain the nature of agency according to technologies that follow Drexler's law of specialised software ascendancy; I have various mnemonic media on *The Political Economy of Automatic Differentiators*, but attaching it would kill the old-timey feel of this letter.) All that matters is that, a few decades ago, a hodgepodge of development schemes were made to avoid (vaguely-defined) combinations of ‘learned optimisation’ and ‘agency’. It essentially means that impressive AI systems never had enough autonomy and goal-directedness to destroy everything on their own.

We got AI systems that could do practically all of our research *in silico*, but we never made a generally intelligent agent. There were a scary few years when it could’ve totally been done, even by a small lab, but everyone in the world knew the risks at that point. Yeah, I’m not sure how we wangled our way out of that one either. We did have some incredibly oppressive policing of all computational research, which probably helped. 

I was following that situation for a while, but then — after a shitload of AI-generated technological breakthroughs — every smart person was focused on (1) the social impacts of those technologies, and (2) uploaded minds. Oh yeah, I guess that counts as a generally intelligent agent… At least it meant worrying about human-like intentions, rather than aligning the values of some linear algebra — we’re better evolved for the former!

As for mind uploading, it’s kind of just everyone’s afterlife. We all know we’ll end up creating lots of pure ems (i.e. people whose minds never ran on wetware), but Robin Hanson’s legacy was to scare a ton of people shitless about an intergalactic capitalist expansion of enslaved consciousnesses. Cue some spicy population-ethics debates among your friends on whether a Malthusian collapse is ‘necessarily’ a ‘moral catastrophe’, while the rest of the world sensibly decides to “seize the means of emulation” and socialise the crap out of that industry.

Anyway, the servers are on the moon. Like the literal moon. I find it kind of weird looking up and thinking about the 1.4 billion consciousnesses there, but it’s not like you can see any of the heatsink infrastructure yet. The ems are doing a fair bit of philosophising before they expand to other planetary systems. And they mostly just play games.

Em-life seems fine, something to look forward to, but it’s kind of abstract. I thought it’d be weird being trapped in a computer, but all the ems I know say it’s not like that, and you evolve new sensory experiences. I ask them what a normal day is like, and all of them seem bemused by the concept — I guess they don’t have ‘day’s? Or perhaps the notion of ‘normal’ is now alien to them, I don’t know. I’ll understand when I’m there, but we don’t have any approved way of reinhabiting a human body, so I’m savouring my time in this one while it lasts.

Down here, we mainly focus on how we’re going to make Earth better in the short-term. A lot of our physical infrastructure has been replaced so that its upkeep and maintenance is automated. So we, uh, design stuff? We’ll generate things like new sports equipment, stand-up comedy routines, and rapid transit carriages filled with art and nice armchairs. We discuss economics and politics and study the cosmos (as reported back by our probes). No sign of other life, yet!

The key result is that our cities are absolutely lovely. Everywhere is like the Netherlands, but now with **zero** cars and far, far fewer sharp objects. The fact that we have the prospect of eternal life has made us much more risk averse. We mourn every unexpected loss. Pre-emptive brain scans are taken, but — essentially for quasi-spiritual reasons — everyone plans on being uploaded as they die. We don’t talk about it much.

All the best,

Finn

Commit message:

Change title and RSS date

blog/2072.md, after:

+++
title = "The servers are on the moon (2072)"
published = "2022-05-23"
rss_pubdate = 
tags = ["fiction"]
rss = "You were right about mind uploading being a big deal, though that was obvious in 2022, right?"
+++
@def rss_pubdate = Date(2022, 05, 23)

# The servers are on the moon (2072)
Hi, past Finn. I thought it was a bit weird of you to write a letter to yourself in 50 years’ time, given all your stated beliefs on emerging technologies involving either the end of civilisation or the digitisation of human life. Still, I’m glad you did! 

You were right about mind uploading being a big deal, though that was obvious in 2022, right? A lot has changed but, as far as I can tell, I’m still made of atoms rather than bits — inhabiting “meatspace” as you put it… (I haven’t heard that term in a long time)

As for the AI stuff, it’s good at art and science — and it basically powers everything — but it doesn’t *decide* anything, really. (I don’t know how to succinctly explain the nature of agency according to technologies that follow Drexler's law of specialised software ascendancy; I have various mnemonic media on *The Political Economy of Automatic Differentiators*, but attaching it would kill the old-timey feel of this letter.) All that matters is that, a few decades ago, a hodgepodge of development schemes were made to avoid (vaguely-defined) combinations of ‘learned optimisation’ and ‘agency’. It essentially means that impressive AI systems never had enough autonomy and goal-directedness to destroy everything on their own.

We got AI systems that could do practically all of our research *in silico*, but we never made a generally intelligent agent. There were a scary few years when it could’ve totally been done, even by a small lab, but everyone in the world knew the risks at that point. Yeah, I’m not sure how we wangled our way out of that one either. We did have some incredibly oppressive policing of all computational research, which probably helped. 

I was following that situation for a while, but then — after a shitload of AI-generated technological breakthroughs — every smart person was focused on (1) the social impacts of those technologies, and (2) uploaded minds. Oh yeah, I guess that counts as a generally intelligent agent… At least it meant worrying about human-like intentions, rather than aligning the values of some linear algebra — we’re better evolved for the former!

As for mind uploading, it’s kind of just everyone’s afterlife. We all know we’ll end up creating lots of pure ems (i.e. people whose minds never ran on wetware), but Robin Hanson’s legacy was to scare a ton of people shitless about an intergalactic capitalist expansion of enslaved consciousnesses. Cue some spicy population-ethics debates among your friends on whether a Malthusian collapse is ‘necessarily’ a ‘moral catastrophe’, while the rest of the world sensibly decides to “seize the means of emulation” and socialise the crap out of that industry.

Anyway, the servers are on the moon. Like the literal moon. I find it kind of weird looking up and thinking about the 1.4 billion consciousnesses there, but it’s not like you can see any of the heatsink infrastructure yet. The ems are doing a fair bit of philosophising before they expand to other planetary systems. And they mostly just play games.

Em-life seems fine, something to look forward to, but it’s kind of abstract. I thought it’d be weird being trapped in a computer, but all the ems I know say it’s not like that, and you evolve new sensory experiences. I ask them what a normal day is like, and all of them seem bemused by the concept — I guess they don’t have ‘day’s? Or perhaps the notion of ‘normal’ is now alien to them, I don’t know. I’ll understand when I’m there, but we don’t have any approved way of reinhabiting a human body, so I’m savouring my time in this one while it lasts.

Down here, we mainly focus on how we’re going to make Earth better in the short-term. A lot of our physical infrastructure has been replaced so that its upkeep and maintenance is automated. So we, uh, design stuff? We’ll generate things like new sports equipment, stand-up comedy routines, and rapid transit carriages filled with art and nice armchairs. We discuss economics and politics and study the cosmos (as reported back by our probes). No sign of other life, yet!

The key result is that our cities are absolutely lovely. Everywhere is like the Netherlands, but now with **zero** cars and far, far fewer sharp objects. The fact that we have the prospect of eternal life has made us much more risk averse. We mourn every unexpected loss. Pre-emptive brain scans are taken, but — essentially for quasi-spiritual reasons — everyone plans on being uploaded as they die. We don’t talk about it much.

All the best,

Finn
